---
title: industrial timez
description: Answers to FAQs about working in tech and the role of a Computational Linguist / Speech Recognition Engineer at Dialpad.
date: 2021-10-27
tags:
  - industry
layout: layouts/post
---

April 2019: I was in the last term of my undergraduate degree, about to go in exam season but feeling pretty relaxed because I had already signed a job offer. I was going to go back to GE Digital as a Software Engineer and work with a team where I'd learned and grown a lot just one year before when I'd interned there.

And then, well, GE Digital was "spun off" from GE proper, thousands of people were laid off (including a bunch of my friends there), and my job offer was rescinded about 2 weeks before my start date.

I would have been able to afford to house myself for a couple of months with money I'd saved from research assistantships and interning, and some money that my would-be manager somehow got GE to pay me, but I was panicking big time about not having a job and started applying widely.

Out of sheer luck, two offers came through within a few weeks - one from Charli.AI and one from Dialpad. I ended up choosing Dialpad and went on to work there for two years.

Before my time, the GE office had been a startup called Bit Stew Systems. By 2019, Bit Stew's founders were doing new things and one of them had a new startup called Charli.AI where many of the laid off ex-GE employees went. After hearing about my prior work at GE, they also offered me a position as an NLU Engineer (Natural Language Understanding Engineer) with no interview.



[[toc]]

## Picking a company

When I was panicking about losing my job offer, I applied widely and desperately to a range of places many of which I wouldn't have applied to if I felt like I had a choice. I did not have much of a strategy other than that I was going to apply to tech roles for about 4 weeks before trying to find a minimum wage job so I could continue to make rent.

I applied to part-time positions, internships, and contractor positions, not just full-time permanent jobs; I applied to full-time jobs at companies whose values I felt didn't align with my own; I applied to data cleaning roles, computational linguist roles, software engineering roles, systems administration roles - basically anything I thought I might get with a linguistics degree or a computer science degree or both (because I joint majored in both). Also, since any money was better than no money, I sent applications to positions across a wide spectrum of salaries. I distinctly remember applying to one software engineer position that paid CAD 35K and another one at another company that paid nearly five times as much

## Application and interview process

## 

## Compensation

## Day-to-day

## People and culture
