---
title: "Pronouning me in English"
description: Quick and dirty guide to my pronouns and a grammar lesson, since Pronoun Island was killed by Heroku.
tags:
  - gender
layout: layouts/post
---

## Usage

#### xe/xem

- Xe is a birder. Xe loves birds.
- This mug belongs to xem.
- Xyr jacket is on the table.
- That bag is xyrs.
- Xe wrote this xyrself/xemself.

#### they/them

- They are a birder. They love birds.
- This mug belongs to them.
- Their jacket is on the table.
- That bag is theirs.
- They wrote this themself.

## Grammar and linguistics

### What are pronouns?

Pronouns are used to stand in for nouns or noun phrases, e.g., _who_, _those_, _you_, _I_, _anybody_, _no one_, etc. Personal pronouns are associated with a specific person, e.g., first person (_I_, _we_, _us_, etc.) second person (_you_, _yourself_, _yours_, etc.) and third person (_he_, _itself_, _their_, etc.). When you are alone and conversing with a person, the personal pronouns you use will mostly be first and second person pronouns, of which the standard English ones are not gendered. When you are conversing with someone and referring to someone else (who may or may not be present), you generally use a name or a third person pronoun. The standard English ones you are definitely familiar with using for people are _he/him_ and _she/her_, although more exist and are in use.

Just like when people tell you their name in an introduction, presentation, email signature, profile or internet handle, so that you can refer to them using that information regardless of whether they are present, listing third person pronouns in these spaces generally indicates that they would like you to refer to them using those pronouns.

### What are all the ingredients I need in order to use a set of pronouns?

To properly use a set of pronouns for someone, you need to know its complete "declension" or all the different forms of a pronoun, depending on the grammatic role it is playing in a sentence. In English there are five forms - the subject, the object, the dependent possessive, the independent possessive, and the reflexive. The five forms of _he_ are: _he_, _him_, _his_, _his_ and _himself_. Similarly, the full declension of _xe_ is: _xe_, _xem_, _xyr_, _xyrs_ and _xyrself_.

Often rather than giving the entire declension of a particular pronoun set, we tend to use shortened versions - for example, you might see _she/her_, _she/hers_ or _she/her/hers_, rather than _she/her/her/hers/herself_ since there is some repetition and some forms can be inferred from other forms. In the case of pronouns that are less familiar to you, you may need more information on the full declension in which case you can use your favourite search engine to find out, or ask the person.

Another piece of information that is important especially with English pronoun sets that may be less familiar to you is whether it takes singular or plural agreement with verbs. This is the difference between saying _He is a student_ and _Ey are a student_.

### Isn't "they" only for multiple people?

Nope. Singular they exists too, and you are probably already familiar with using generic singular they, e.g., in the sentence _Someone left their keys in the kitchen._ This use of they refers to a single person who is unspecified and generic, sometimes even unknown. You might be less familiar with singular specific they, e.g., _Vagrant left their keys in the kitchen_, but that can be learned.

### Aren't pronouns unchangeable? Aren't they a closed class of words that cannot be added to?

All language is productive and ever-changing, thanks to the creativity of its users. There are pronouns that were once part of standardized English but no longer are (e.g., _thou_, _thee_). Conversely, the pronoun _you_ was plural before it was singular. Swedish now has a widely accepted gender-neutral pronoun that was first proposed by a linguist less than 60 years ago. So it is not true that pronouns are a class of words that can never be changed.

Pronouns in English are often described as a closed class, i.e., a class that does not easily acquire new members. Anecdotally, this is clearly not the case in many English language communities I am part of. There is also [evidence that English pronouns are shifting to an open class category](https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.105/), like they are in Japanese.

## Miscellaneous pronoun links

- [How to do the absolute minimum (with pronouns) - Kirby Conrod](https://kconrod.medium.com/how-to-do-the-absolute-minimum-with-pronouns-9be0eef5ff62)
- [pronouns 101: introduction to your loved one's new pronouns - Kirby Conrod](https://kconrod.medium.com/pronouns-101-introduction-to-your-loved-ones-new-pronouns-3fef080266d0)
- [pronouns 102: how to stop messing up pronouns - Kirby Conrod](https://kconrod.medium.com/pronouns-102-how-to-stop-messing-up-pronouns-9bd66911118)
- [Guest Lecture in Pronouns: Vagrant - me](https://kconrod.medium.com/guest-lecture-in-pronouns-vasundhara-1c61d3023e0c)
- [pronouns aren't gender; please get better at looking at birds - Kirby Conrod](https://kconrod.medium.com/pronouns-arent-gender-please-get-better-at-looking-at-birds-8e6310ef455a)
- [Welcome to the Modern World of Pronouns: Identity-Inclusive Natural Language Processing beyond Gender - Anne Lauscher, Archie Crowley, Dirk Hovy](https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.105/)
